The **Swin-Expand: Fine-Grained Polyp Segmentation and Classification** dataset contain 1126 high-definition images representing the three main histological classes. Colorectal cancer is one of the main causes of cancer death worldwide. Colonoscopy is the gold standard screening tool as it allows lesion detection and removal during the same procedure. During the last decades, several efforts have been made to develop CAD systems to assist clinicians in lesion detection and classification. Regarding the latter, and in order to be used in the exploration room as part of resect and discard or leave-in-situ strategies, these systems must identify correctly all different lesion types. This is a challenging task, as the data used to train these systems presents great inter-class similarity, high class imbalance, and low representation of clinically relevant histology classes such as serrated sessile adenomas.

The authors introduced a new polyp segmentation and classification method, Swin-Expand. Based on Swin-Transformer, it uses a simple and lightweight decoder. The performance of this method has been assessed on a novel dataset, comprising 1126 high-definition images representing the three main histological classes. Results show a clear improvement in both segmentation and classification performance, also achieving competitive results when tested in public datasets. These results confirm that both the method and the data are important to obtain more accurate polyp representations.